# Hand_Sign_lang_detection
Speech impaired people use hand signs and gestures to communicate. Normal people face difficulty in understanding their language. Hence there is a need of a system which recognizes the different signs, gestures, and conveys the information to the normal people. It bridges the gap between physically challenged people and normal people. Machine Learning (ML) is subset of artificial intelligence (AI) that enables computers to learn from data and make decisions or predictions without being explicitly programmed. It is based on the idea that systems can identify patterns, learn from data, and improve their performance over time with minimal human intervention. Support Vector Machine(SVM) is a supervised machine learning algorithm that is commonly used for classification and regression tasks. The primary objective of the SVM algorithm is to find the hyperplane that best separates the classes in the input data. The hyperplane is the decision boundary that maximizes the margin between the classes, which is the distance between the hyperplane and the closest data points from each class. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are a class of deep learning models primarily used for processing structured grid data, such as
images. Random Forest is an ensemble learning method that can be used for both classification and regression. It can be a quick way to prototype hand sign detection. Report and Accuracy : Two layers of image processing have been used: in the first layer, images are processed as a whole for training, and in the second layer, the hand landmarks are extracted. A multi-headed convolutional neural network (CNN) model has been proposed and tested with 30% of the dataset to train these two layers. To avoid the overfitting problem, data augmentation and dynamic learning rate reduction have been used. With the
proposed model, 98.981% test accuracy has been achieved.
